+++
title = "2021-05-17"
author = ["Durham Smith"]
draft = false
+++

## Peer Review {#peer-review}

[Nature - How to write a thorough peer review](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-06991-0)

-   Read 3 time, each time focusing on a different element
    1.  Impression
        -   Does it fit the journals scope?
            "Answering this question forces you to better understand the research and think about the paper’s mission: what it’s trying to achieve."
        -   Do you have the required skills to judge this?
            "Be upfront and honest with the authors and the editor about which scientific aspects you will focus on in your review."
        -   When finished: Mirror
            -   Write down your understanding of the science
                " This tells the authors how you — the reader — have interpreted the aims, results and novelty of their research. If they disagree with your analysis, they should, from your comments, be able to understand that this is not your fault. Your analysis is a clear message that the authors need to work on how they communicate their intentions."
    2.  Concentrate on the scientific nuts and bolts of the research
        "Remember to distinguish between major and minor issues, and to read the paper in chronological order. Ask the following questions"
        -   Do the Abstract and Introduction clearly identify the need for this research, and its relevance?
        -   Does the Methodology target the main question(s) appropriately?
        -   Are the Results presented clearly and logically, and are they justified by the data provided? Are the figures clear and fully described?
        -   Do the Conclusions justifiably respond to the main questions posed by the author(s) in the Introduction?

            "It is particularly important to ensure that the questions put forth in the Introduction are answered properly in the Conclusions. Try to spot anywhere the paper might start to take you on a wild goose chase. The paper should leave wild geese alone, unless it’s a submission to an ornithology journal."

    3.  Writing and Presentation (take some days off before this)
        -   Make sure to backup comments on writing style
            "Don’t just note, “This is badly written.” Suggest to the authors how to make the story more cohesive and tightly reasoned. Was the paper hard to read because the paragraphs did not flow together? Did the authors flood the paper with confusing acronyms?"
-   **NB** At every point categorize flaws as minor, major or fatal
-   The full peer-review document can comprise the following sections:
    -   Introduction: Mirror the article, state your expertise and whether the paper is publishable, or whether there are fatal flaws;
    -   Major flaws;
    -   Minor flaws;
    -   Other, lesser suggestions and final comments.
-   Read the review aloud,
    -   Ensure you dont stumble when reading (readers will do the same)
    -   Draw your attention to how your criticisms might sound to the ears of the authors
        -   Ensure that your critiques are constructive and not offensive
        -   Sometimes, you should submit a harsh review, but never a rude one
        -   “golden rule” of peer reviewing (M. A. McPeek, et al. Am. Naturalist 173, E155–E158; 2009): “review for others as you would have others review for you”.

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0cchYD9hpY>
“Review the submission, not your experience of reading it.” - Rebekah Baglini

[How to Write a Peer Review](https://plos.org/resource/how-to-write-a-peer-review/)

-   Use an outline for reviewer report

    -   <https://plos.org/resource/peer-review-template/>

    "Think about structuring your review like an inverted pyramid. Put the most important information at the top, followed by details and examples in the center, and any additional points at the very bottom."

    -   Summary of the research and your overall impression
    -   Discussion of specific areas for improvement
    -   Any other points

-   General guidelines for effective feedback
    -   Do
        -   Justify your recommendation with concrete evidence and specific examples.
        -   Be specific so the authors know what they need to do to improve.
        -   Be thorough. This might be the only time you read the manuscript.
        -   Be professional and respectful. The authors will be reading these comments too.
        -   Remember to say what you liked about the manuscript!
    -   Dont
        -   Recommend additional experiments or  unnecessary elements that are out of scope for the study or for the journal criteria.
        -   Tell the authors exactly how to revise their manuscript—you don’t need to do their work for them.
        -   Use the review to promote your own research or hypotheses.
        -   Focus on typos and grammar. If the manuscript needs significant editing for language and writing quality, just mention this in your comments.
        -   Submit your review without proofreading it and checking everything one more time.

            n

[Peer Review Examples - F1000 Research](https://f1000research.com/for-referees/peer-reviewing-tips/examples)

[Springer Nature Peer Review Course](https://www.springernature.com/gp/authors/campaigns/how-to-peer-review)

-   [How to peer Review](https://www.springernature.com/gp/authors/campaigns/how-to-peer-review)
    -   Journals use peer review to both validate the research reported in submitted manuscripts, and sometimes to help inform their decisions about whether or not to publish that article in their journal.
    -   Some of the problems that peer reviewers may find in a manuscript include errors in the study’s methods or analysis that raise questions about the findings, or sections that need clearer explanations so that the manuscript is easily understood.
    -   From a journal editor’s point of view, comments on the importance and novelty of a manuscript, and if it will interest the journal’s audience, are particularly useful in helping them to decide which manuscripts to publish
    -   Peer Review Types: Closed, Double-blind, Open.
    -   Why do it?
        -   Serving as a peer reviewer looks good on your CV as it shows that your expertise is recognized by other scientists
        -   You will get to read some of the latest science in your field well before it is in the public domain.
        -   The critical thinking skills needed during peer review will help you in your own research and writing.
    -   Who benefits?
        -   Authors
            Try to review the manuscript as you would like others to review your work. When you point out problems in a manuscript, do so in a way that will help the authors to improve the manuscript. Even if you recommend to the editor that the manuscript be rejected, your suggested revisions could help the authors prepare the manuscript for submission to a different journal.
        -   Journal editors
            Comment on the importance and novelty of the study. Editors will use your comments to assess whether the manuscript is of the right level of impact for the journal. Your comments and opinions on the paper are much more important that a simple recommendation; editors need to know why you think a paper should be published or rejected as your reasoning will help inform their decision.
        -   Readers
            Identify areas that need clarification to make sure other readers can easily understand the manuscript. As a reviewer, you can also save readers’ time and frustration by helping to keep unimportant or error filled research out of the published literature.
    -   Accepting an invitation to review
        -   Are you qualified?
            The editor has asked you to review the manuscript because he or she believes you are familiar with the specific topic or research method used in the paper. It will usually be okay if you can review some, but not all, aspects of a manuscript. In this case, simply review the parts of the manuscript that are in your area of expertise, and tell the editor which parts you cannot review. However, if the manuscript is too far outside your area, you should decline to review it.
        -   Do you have time?
        -   Are there any potential conflicts of interest
-   [Evaluating Manuscripts](https://www.springernature.com/gp/authors/campaigns/how-to-peer-review-2)
    -   Wider Context Questions to ask:
        When you first receive the manuscript it is recommended that you read it through once and focus on the wider context of the research.

        -   What research question(s) do the authors address? Do they make a good argument for why a question is important?
        -   What methods do the authors use to answer the question? Are the methods the most current available or is there a newer more powerful method available? Does their overall strategy seem like a good one, or are there major problems with their methods? Are there other experiments that would greatly improve the quality of the manuscript? If so, are they necessary to make the work publishable? Would any different data help confirm the presented results and strengthen the paper?
        -   Were the results analyzed and interpreted correctly? Does the evidence support the authors’ conclusions?
        -   Will the results advance your field in some way? If so, how much? Does the importance of the advance match the standards of the journal?
        -   Will other researchers be interested in reading the study? If so, what types of researchers? Do they match the journal’s audience? Does the manuscript take account of international and cultural differences? Is there an alternative readership that the paper would be more suitable for? For example, a study about renal disease in children might be suitable for either a pediatrics-centric journal or one that is targeted at nephrologists.
        -   Does the manuscript fit together well? Does it clearly describe what was done, why it was done, and what the results mean?
        -   Is the manuscript written well and easy to read? If the manuscript has many mistakes, you can suggest that the authors have it checked by a native English speaker. If the language quality is so poor that it is difficult to understand, you can ask that the manuscript be corrected before you review it.

        After your first reading, write one or two paragraphs summarizing what the manuscript is about and how it adds to current knowledge in your field. Mention the strengths of the manuscript, but also any problems that make you believe it should not be published, or that would need to be corrected to make it publishable. These summary paragraphs are the start of your review, and they will demonstrate to the editor and authors that you have read the manuscript carefully. They will also help the editor, who may not be a specialist in this particular field, understand the wider context of the research. Finally, these paragraphs will highlight the manuscript’s main messages that will be taken away by readers.You can then proceed in evaluating the individual sections of the paper.
    -   Title, abstract, and keywords

        The title, abstract and keywords are items that will help other researchers to find the published paper and decide if they will read further. Abstracts must be a clear, short summary of the full manuscript. Researchers want their work to be read, so it is important that their abstract be interesting and hold the reader’s attention.

        Some questions to ask yourself about the title, abstract and keywords are:

        -   Does the title accurately say what the study was about? If not, can you suggest a different title?
        -   Does the abstract effectively summarize the manuscript? Could the abstract be understood by a researcher outside your specialty?
        -   Does it include enough information to stand alone? Does the abstract contain information that is unnecessary?
        -   Is there any information in the abstract that is not in the main text of the manuscript?
        -   If present, will the key words help readers to find the article? Are they specific, and do they represent the manuscript content?

    -   Introduction
        Like the title and abstract, the Introduction tells the reader what the manuscript will be about. However, unlike the abstract, the Introduction gives the background for the research question.While reviewing the Introduction, ask the following questions:
        -   Does it explain the background well enough that researchers outside your specialty can understand it?
        -   Does it accurately describe current knowledge related to the research question?Does the Introduction contain unnecessary information? Can it be made more concise?
        -   Are the reasons for performing the study clear?
        -   Are the aims of the study clearly defined and consistent with the rest of the manuscript? Does it introduce the research’s theoretical framework?
        -   Have the authors missed any key references that would be important for a reader to access? Make suggestions for additional, relevant references if necessary.
    -   Materials and methods
        The study’s methods are one of the most important parts used to judge the overall quality of the paper. In addition the Methods section should give readers enough information so that they can repeat the experiments. Reviewers should look for potential sources of bias in the way the study was designed and carried out, and for places where more explanation is needed.

        The specific types of information in a Methods section will vary from field to field and from study to study. However, some general rules for Methods sections are:

        -   It should be clear from the Methods section how all of the data in the Results section were obtained.
        -   The study system should be clearly described.
        -   In most cases, the experiments should include appropriate controls or comparators. The conditions of the controls should be specified.
        -   The outcomes of the study should be defined, and the outcome measures should be objectively validated.
        -   The methods used to analyze the data must be statistically sound.
        -   For qualitative studies, an established qualitative research method (e.g. grounded theory is often used in sociology) must be used as appropriate for the study question.
        -   If the authors used a technique from a published study, they should include a citation and a summary of the procedure in the text. The method also needs to be appropriate to the present experiment.
        -   All materials and instruments should be identified, including the supplier’s name and location. For example, “Tests were conducted with a Vulcanizer 2.0 (XYZ Instruments, Mumbai, India).”
        -   The Methods section should not have information that belongs in another section (such as the Introduction or Results)

        You may suggest if additional experiments would greatly improve the quality of the manuscript. Your suggestions should be in line with the study’s aims. Remember that almost any study could be strengthened by further experiments, so only suggest further work if you believe that the manuscript is not publishable without it.
    -   Results and figures

        Readers will usually first look at a manuscript’s title, abstract and results. Therefore the results section including any figures and tables are some of the most important parts of the manuscript. You should carefully examine the figures and tables to check they accurately describe the results. If you think it necessary, you can suggest any changes that would make the results easier to understand.

        -   For figures, check that the plotted parameters are clearly defined. Figures and tables should include measures of uncertainty, such as standard error or confidence intervals, as well as the sample size.
        -   Table headings and figure legends should be detailed enough that readers can understand the data without reading the main text.
        -   Look for places where data are unnecessarily repeated in figures, tables or main text. The text should point out key findings or trends, not repeat data presented elsewhere. Similarly figures that present a very small amount of data can often be combined with another or deleted and replaced with an explanation in the manuscript text.
        -   If a result is not central to the study’s aims, it is often acceptable to summarize it but not present the data. However, failing to show important data, or too many instances of “data not shown,” are unacceptable and you can recommend that it be added into the main manuscript.
        -   Interesting data that are not needed to support the study’s major conclusions might be better presented as supplementary material rather than the main text of the paper; feel free to point out such data in your comments.
        -   Feedback on whether the data are presented in the most appropriate manner; for example, is a table being used where a graph would give increased clarity? Do the figures appear to be genuine, i.e. without evidence of manipulation, and of a high enough quality to be published in their present form?
        -   Watch for places where the authors have included interpretations in the Results section. This section should simply state what the results were, not what they might mean. Interpretations and inferences belong in the Discussion section. (However, for journals that combine the Results and Discussion sections, results and interpretations do not need to be separated.)
    -   Statistics
        Most scientific manuscripts include statistical analysis, and a study’s conclusions depend on the results of these analyses. If the data are analyzed or reported incorrectly, the manuscript will mislead readers. Therefore, as a scientist, and as a peer reviewer, it is important to have a solid understanding of statistics, and to carefully examine the statistical methods and reporting in manuscripts you review. If you do not feel qualified to fully evaluate the statistics, tell the editor this in your comments so that they know to ask someone else to review them.

        Some questions to ask as you review statistical analyses and results are:

        -   Was the sample size appropriate and/or justified? Did the authors perform a power analysis as part of their study design?
        -   Did the data meet the assumptions of the tests used? (e.g., many statistical tests can only be used for data with a normal distribution. Data such as proportions or counts of the number of events are generally not normally distributed and have to be either transformed or, preferably, analyzed with statistical models suitable for these data types). Were the tests used appropriate?
        -   Are the individual data points statistically independent? If there were repeated measurements (for instance, multiple measurements on the same patient), have appropriate statistical models been used?
        -   Have potential sources of bias (e.g. confounding variables) been considered and accounted for in the analysis?
        -   When percentages are presented, are the numerator and denominator clear? E.g., “Of the 500 bee colonies, 200 (40%) were affected by the virus,” or, “Forty percent (200/500) of the bee colonies were affected by the virus.”
        -   Are p-values reported where appropriate? Generally, a p-value should accompany all statistical comparisons mentioned in the text, figures and tables. The actual p-value should be stated (e.g. p = 0.049 and p = 0.0021 rather than p ‹ 0.05 or p ‹ 0.01). However, it is acceptable to state p ‹ 0.0001 if the value is below this threshold. The Statistical Analysis section should also state the threshold for accepting significance, such as "Values of P ‹ 0.05 were considered statistically significant"

        Common problems with methods and statistics

        -   Replication that is absent or inadequate. Replication is essential in order to minimize sampling error. If a study does not have the right number of replicates, general inferences cannot be made from it and the power of statistical analyses done on the data would be too low. The result of low statistical power is that real differences or treatment effect cannot be detected.
        -   Confounding. The problem of confounding means that differences due to experimental treatments cannot be separated from other factors that might be causing the observed difference. Confounding can be avoided by careful experimental design, such as proper replication, controls and randomization.
        -   Poor sampling methods. In observational studies, random sampling is needed to make sure that the experimental sample is representative of the whole population. If random sampling has not been used, check that the authors justify their sampling methods.
        -   Lack of randomization. In experimental studies, “treatments” must be randomly allocated to experimental units (or vice versa), to make sure that the groups being compared are similar and factors that could confound interpretation of treatment effects are minimized.
        -   Pseudoreplication. The sample size should reflect the number of different times that the effect of interest was independently tested. For instance, if there are repeated measurements on the same set of subjects, as might occur when measuring individuals repeatedly over a period of time, individual data points are not independent. In these cases, averages per individual, or appropriate statistical models that account for repeated measures (e.g. mixed effects models), should be used to analyze the data. If the statistics are not explained, pseudoreplication can often be spotted by looking at the degrees of freedom (essentially, the number of independent pieces of information) of the statistical tests.
    -   Reviewing review articles
        A review article is written to summarize the current state of understanding on a topic, and peer reviewing these types of articles requires a slightly different set of criteria compared with empirical articles. Unless it is a systematic review/meta-analysis methods are not important or reported. The quality of a review article can be judged on aspects such as timeliness, the breadth and accuracy of the discussion, and if it indicates the best avenues for future research. The review article should present an unbiased summary of the current understanding of the topic, and therefore the peer reviewer must assess the selection of studies that are cited by the paper. As review article contains a large amount of detailed information, its structure and flow are also important.
-   [Evaluating the discussion and conclusion](https://www.springernature.com/gp/authors/campaigns/how-to-peer-review-3)

    In the Discussion and Conclusion sections, authors should interpret the results, place them in context of previous findings, and explain what they mean for future research, as well as for possible real-life applications. If the author has not made these points as clear as they should be, note this in your review

    -   Other questions to ask include:
        -   Does the Discussion fit with the aims of the study stated in the Introduction?
        -   Are there any alternative interpretations of the data that the authors should have considered in their Discussion?
        -   Is there any general background that belongs in the Introduction section rather than the Discussion?
        -   Have the authors adequately compared their findings with the findings of other studies?
        -   Do the authors present data in the Discussion? All relevant data should be presented in the Results section, although important or interesting results can be summarized as part of the Discussion. For example, a sentence such as “Group B’s one-year survival rate was significantly higher than Group A’s,” is acceptable in the Discussion. But a sentence such as, “Group B’s one-year survival rate (1200 / 2000, 60%) was higher than Group A’s (800 / 2000, 40%) (P ‹ 0.05),” belongs in the Results section.
        -   Do the authors mention how the study’s results might influence future research?
        -   Are the limitations of the study noted? If not, what limitations have you found?
        -   Are the authors’ conclusions supported by their data? Have the authors overstated the importance of their findings?

    -   References
